README.md, before:

# A FastAPI sample project

###  KodeKloud course - https://learn.kodekloud.com/user/courses/python-api-development-with-fastapi
###  source repo - https://github.com/Sanjeev-Thiyagarajan/fastapi-course


# My Notes: 

### get and post requests with fastAPI

### fastapi.params Body

## schema validation with Pydantic
#### validate the data the client is sending back
#### see the pydantic_example.py file
#### Typing library for optional fields 

## CRUD best practices
#### create, read, update, delete
#### POST, GET, PUT/PATCH, DELETE
#### PUT send all items to update the record
#### PATCH send specific items to update
#### Best practices - 
#### routes are plural, like - users, posts.  not user, post
#### POST should have a route like /posts
#### @app.post("/posts")
#### GET should have 2 routes for getting 1 or all like /posts/:id  or /posts
#### @app.get("/posts/{id}")  or @app.get("/posts")
#### PUT should have a route to update 1 item like /posts/:id
#### @app.put("/posts/{id}")
#### DELETE should have route to remove 1 item like /posts/:id
#### @app.delete("/posts/{id}")

## fastapi status and HTTPException to work with the response code

## psycopg - library for postgres
#### https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/basic/index.html

## Sqlalchemy for Object Relational Mapping / ORM

## SQLModel is FastAPI's wrapper on top of Sqlalchemy

## Pydantic models vs SQLAlchemy models
#### pydantic models are schema models that define the structure of a request/response
#### sqlalchemy models are responsible for defining the columns in our postgres db
#### sqlalchemy models are also used for the CRUD operations in the database

## password hashing
#### https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/security/oauth2-jwt/#password-hashing
#### using passlib[bcrypt] library

## authentication
#### jwt token authentication
#### comprised of header, payload, and secret/signature
#### jwt tokens are not encrypted.  Don't put sensitive data in the payload

#### uv add pyjwt
#### import as 'jwt', not to be confused with another library just called 'jwt' that you can install
#### kodekloud project uses old jose library for jwt, fastapi docs use this new pyjwt instead

## protected routes
#### protect routes by adding a Depends() on oath2.get_current_user in the method signature
#### requests to that route will require a header with Authorization: Bearer <theToken>
##### test an expired token by changing the expiration time to 1 minute

### postman tips
##### to make testing with postman less annoying create an environment
##### you can setup variables to apply to all the operations, like baseUrl
##### you can also set an environment variable to grab a new access_token, and save that to be used in all routes


## foreign keys
#### SQLAlchemy model post class altered to have a user_id column and a foreign key back to users.id
#### SQLAlchemy won't add the new column and foreign key since the table already existed
#### A SQL Migration tool like Alembic would be required to do it programmatically
#### manual migration
```
alter table posts add column user_id INTEGER;

update posts set user_id = 14;

ALTER TABLE IF EXISTS public.posts
    ALTER COLUMN user_id SET NOT NULL;
	
ALTER TABLE IF EXISTS public.posts
    ADD CONSTRAINT posts_users_fk FOREIGN KEY (user_id)
    REFERENCES public.users (id) MATCH SIMPLE
    ON UPDATE NO ACTION
    ON DELETE CASCADE
    NOT VALID;
```

##### Other areas of the app need to be updated to accommodate the changes
##### optional, update schemas.post to have the PostResponse show the user_id in the response_model
##### the POST router for posts to set the user_id = the current logged in user_id


## SQLAlchemy table relationships
#### add relationship to the model
#### then, the object in the schema to be included in the response model
#### the end result for example, is that you can see the user's email in the response instead of just the user_id


## Query parameters
#### add a limit, skip / offset (pagination), search to the path 
#### query parameters are added to a path operation after a question mark like - 
#### /posts?limit=10
#### add limit to the method signature as a variable, set a default value
#### update the db query to pass in the limit like
#### posts = db.query(models.Post).limit(limit).all()


## environment variables
#### pydantic has a BaseSettings class that can be used for validation, typecasting, and using environment variables
####  uv add pydantic-settings
#### importing this library also imports python-dotenv
#### set in this project in config.py
#### example: 
```from pydantic_settings import BaseSettings
class Settings(BaseSettings): 
     database_password: str "Can set a default if needed"
     secret_key: str
```
#### then initialize and access with an instance like - settings = Settings()
```
blah = settings.secret_key
```

## added votes to application
#### created model, schema, router, and import into main 


## SQL Migrations with Alembic
#### https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/tutorial.html
#### install alembic library
#### alembic init <directoryName>  - init a directory
#### import our SQLAlchemy Base into the alembic env.py file, like from app.database import Base
#### set alembic target_metadata = Base.metadata
#### set env.py config.set_main_option() to override db connection from alembic.ini for the sqlalchemy_url
#### then in the env.py override we can reference the connection string using environment variables

## CORS Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
#### blocked by default, add allowed origins
#### in fastapi add middleware or some function to run before each request -
#### app.add_middleware(allow_origins=[])

## Deployment
#### Heroku Python - https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-python
#### Heroku Postgres - https://devcenter.heroku.com/categories/heroku-postgres
#### Uvicorn and Gunicorn - https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/deployment/server-workers/
#### Proxy with Nginx Example - https://unit.nginx.org/howto/fastapi/
#### Docker - https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/deployment/docker/

Commit message:

run alembic upgrade head on application startup - readme

README.md, after:

# A FastAPI sample project

###  KodeKloud course - https://learn.kodekloud.com/user/courses/python-api-development-with-fastapi
###  source repo - https://github.com/Sanjeev-Thiyagarajan/fastapi-course


# My Notes: 

### get and post requests with fastAPI

### fastapi.params Body

## schema validation with Pydantic
#### validate the data the client is sending back
#### see the pydantic_example.py file
#### Typing library for optional fields 

## CRUD best practices
#### create, read, update, delete
#### POST, GET, PUT/PATCH, DELETE
#### PUT send all items to update the record
#### PATCH send specific items to update
#### Best practices - 
#### routes are plural, like - users, posts.  not user, post
#### POST should have a route like /posts
#### @app.post("/posts")
#### GET should have 2 routes for getting 1 or all like /posts/:id  or /posts
#### @app.get("/posts/{id}")  or @app.get("/posts")
#### PUT should have a route to update 1 item like /posts/:id
#### @app.put("/posts/{id}")
#### DELETE should have route to remove 1 item like /posts/:id
#### @app.delete("/posts/{id}")

## fastapi status and HTTPException to work with the response code

## psycopg - library for postgres
#### https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/basic/index.html

## Sqlalchemy for Object Relational Mapping / ORM

## SQLModel is FastAPI's wrapper on top of Sqlalchemy

## Pydantic models vs SQLAlchemy models
#### pydantic models are schema models that define the structure of a request/response
#### sqlalchemy models are responsible for defining the columns in our postgres db
#### sqlalchemy models are also used for the CRUD operations in the database

## password hashing
#### https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/security/oauth2-jwt/#password-hashing
#### using passlib[bcrypt] library

## authentication
#### jwt token authentication
#### comprised of header, payload, and secret/signature
#### jwt tokens are not encrypted.  Don't put sensitive data in the payload

#### uv add pyjwt
#### import as 'jwt', not to be confused with another library just called 'jwt' that you can install
#### kodekloud project uses old jose library for jwt, fastapi docs use this new pyjwt instead

## protected routes
#### protect routes by adding a Depends() on oath2.get_current_user in the method signature
#### requests to that route will require a header with Authorization: Bearer <theToken>
##### test an expired token by changing the expiration time to 1 minute

### postman tips
##### to make testing with postman less annoying create an environment
##### you can setup variables to apply to all the operations, like baseUrl
##### you can also set an environment variable to grab a new access_token, and save that to be used in all routes


## foreign keys
#### SQLAlchemy model post class altered to have a user_id column and a foreign key back to users.id
#### SQLAlchemy won't add the new column and foreign key since the table already existed
#### A SQL Migration tool like Alembic would be required to do it programmatically
#### manual migration
```
alter table posts add column user_id INTEGER;

update posts set user_id = 14;

ALTER TABLE IF EXISTS public.posts
    ALTER COLUMN user_id SET NOT NULL;
	
ALTER TABLE IF EXISTS public.posts
    ADD CONSTRAINT posts_users_fk FOREIGN KEY (user_id)
    REFERENCES public.users (id) MATCH SIMPLE
    ON UPDATE NO ACTION
    ON DELETE CASCADE
    NOT VALID;
```

##### Other areas of the app need to be updated to accommodate the changes
##### optional, update schemas.post to have the PostResponse show the user_id in the response_model
##### the POST router for posts to set the user_id = the current logged in user_id


## SQLAlchemy table relationships
#### add relationship to the model
#### then, the object in the schema to be included in the response model
#### the end result for example, is that you can see the user's email in the response instead of just the user_id


## Query parameters
#### add a limit, skip / offset (pagination), search to the path 
#### query parameters are added to a path operation after a question mark like - 
#### /posts?limit=10
#### add limit to the method signature as a variable, set a default value
#### update the db query to pass in the limit like
#### posts = db.query(models.Post).limit(limit).all()


## environment variables
#### pydantic has a BaseSettings class that can be used for validation, typecasting, and using environment variables
####  uv add pydantic-settings
#### importing this library also imports python-dotenv
#### set in this project in config.py
#### example: 
```from pydantic_settings import BaseSettings
class Settings(BaseSettings): 
     database_password: str "Can set a default if needed"
     secret_key: str
```
#### then initialize and access with an instance like - settings = Settings()
```
blah = settings.secret_key
```

## added votes to application
#### created model, schema, router, and import into main 


## SQL Migrations with Alembic
#### https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/tutorial.html
#### install alembic library
#### alembic init <directoryName>  - init a directory
#### import our SQLAlchemy Base into the alembic env.py file, like from app.database import Base
#### set alembic target_metadata = Base.metadata
#### set env.py config.set_main_option() to override db connection from alembic.ini for the sqlalchemy_url
#### then in the env.py override we can reference the connection string using environment variables
#### updated main.py to run `alembic upgrade head` on application startup

## CORS Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
#### blocked by default, add allowed origins
#### in fastapi add middleware or some function to run before each request -
#### app.add_middleware(allow_origins=[])

## Deployment
#### Heroku Python - https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-python
#### Heroku Postgres - https://devcenter.heroku.com/categories/heroku-postgres
#### Uvicorn and Gunicorn - https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/deployment/server-workers/
#### Proxy with Nginx Example - https://unit.nginx.org/howto/fastapi/
#### Docker - https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/deployment/docker/
